---
title: 'Review: David Crump&#8217;s &#8220;Encountering Jesus, Encountering Scripture&#8221;'
author: wagraham87@gmail.com
layout: post
permalink: /review-david-crumps-encountering-jesus-encountering-scripture/
categories:
  - Book Review
tags:
  - David Crump
  - Jesus
---
Crump, David. *Encountering Jesus, Encountering Scripture: Reading the Bible Critically in Faith*. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2013. 145 pp.

David Crump wrote *Encountering Jesus, Encountering Scripture* in order to help readers know God (5). Put another way, Crump explores “the New Testament’s portrayal of the paradox of faith as both the catalyst for and the consequence of a personal encounter with the living Christ — an encounter that begs recognition in every area of a believer’s life” (12). Key to Crump’s thesis is Kierkegaard’s emphasis on a personal decision to follow Christ, to take a passionate leap of faith (12). Indeed, throughout the work, Crump uses Kierkegaard as a conversational partner to illustrate his thesis.

In concrete terms, Crump believes that historical arguments alone cannot persuade anyone to believe in Jesus. Quite the opposite, historical arguments say little to nothing about Jesus. For this reason, a personal decision must be made to believe in Jesus before historical arguments can make sense. To cite one major example in Crump’s argument, Crump maintains that “nothing is direct about Jesus’ relationship to the Old Testament or to Jewish expectations of the Messiah” (16). Insiders, Crump argues, stubbornly refuse “to admit the obvious. If Jesus’ fulfillment of messianic expectations were truly straightforward, why did so many seem oblivious to that reality?” (16). No one could have expected Jesus to come and do what he did, and, in so doing, Crump breaks away from D. A. Carson (26–27), N.T. Wright (28 fn.44), and Douglas Moo (35–37) who all either argue for intertextual or for historical middle terms that can link the Old Testament/Pre-Jesus expectations with the New Testament-Post Jesus expectations. Yet, in Crump’s reading, all fail, because “The Messiah’s image and the significance of his work are inscribed only on the New Testament overlay” (41).<!--more-->

How should we receive Crump’s argument? For the past five years or thereabouts, I have tried to reconcile the precise issues that Crump highlights: how does Jesus fulfill the Scripture and upon what is my faith based? So much of what Crump says speaks directly to me. I can agree that the Old Testament, without the New Testament, does not forecast the precise details of Jesus’ life, death and resurrection. Yet, one needs to reconcile Paul’s insistence that the Gospel relies on its Scriptural pedigree (1 Cor 15:1–4). If this is so, why did none of the disciples understand this, nor any faithful Jew, nor John the Baptist, nor the disciples on the road to Emmaus understand that Jesus had to die, be buried, and rise on the third day according to the Scriptures? I would suggest that they needed to first believe and receive the Spirit who would teach them all things (John 14:26) before understanding how the old relates to the new.

So yes, Crump’s thesis makes a certain kind of sense. But, Crump has given away too much in his programme to emphasize personal encounter over rational argument. I am not prepared to toss out the Augustine’s saying, “What was hidden in the old is revealed in the new.” In my search to understand how the Scriptures find their fulfillment in Jesus, I have found a suffering Messiah who will die and then see the light (Isa 53); I have witnessed to a leader who will be pierced (Zech 9–14); and I have witnessed to a New Covenant that grants God’s Spirit to his people (Jer 31; Ezek 36). Prospective trajectories to the Messiah exist and thrive in the Old Testament, but they need the light of the Gospel to see them clearly. An Old Testament passage may represents dozen bundles of bolts shot off in different directions. We only know the correct target, because Jesus came and taught us faith. We now know which bundle of arrows to follow and toward what trajectory they vector. Sometimes, we don’t know which bolt within the bundle is the closest to the bull’s eye, even though we know the trajectory. I answer “yes,” but “no” to Crump, because he gives too much away, while arguing well for an experiential faith that provides us a sanctified vision to read the Scripture (cf. 2 Cor 3-4).

The remaining chapters of Crump’s book seek to illustrate his thesis through the message of Jesus, the experience of Paul, our experience of faith, and finally how experience can resurrect reason and bring Jesus Christ back to the centre of education and all of life. These chapters fill out Crump’s thesis admirably. Any interested Christian ought to read to Crump’s work with a healthy sense of critical skepticism. While correct in so many ways, one may gain the impression that Crump overstates the problem of history and faith in such a way so as to bolster his case, indeed to frame his case in such a way as to be the only possible way to exercise faith in Jesus.